YouTube just gave creators the power to
turn their entire back catalog into
reoccurring revenue while finally giving
brands measurable impressions instead of
expensive gambles. It's called dynamic
ad insertion and it's about to transform
creators into media mogul while solving
one of the biggest problems in
advertising. I'm Neil Patel and I run an
advertising company that manages
billions in digital ad spend. In this
video, I'll show you how creators can
unlock new income streams, how brands
can spend smarter on ads that actually
work, and why this update is rewriting
the rules of modern media.
When YouTube launched in 2005, it
accidentally created the biggest problem
in modern advertising. See, YouTube gave
creators an amazing platform to build
audiences. Millions of people could now
create content and find viewers. But
there was one massive flaw in the
system. Creators had to choose between
making good content or making money.
Here's what I mean. Let's say you're a
creator in 2015. You make a video about
productivity tips. It gets 2 million
views. A productivity app company
reaches out and offers you $20,000 to
mention their product. But here's the
catch. Once you record that sponsorship
into the video, it's burned in forever.
that sponsor gets to ride the wave of
that video success for years, maybe
millions more views, while just paying
you once. And for the creator, that's
the end of the deal. You can't resell
that sponsorship slot. And aside from
the trickle of AdSense revenue you get,
there's no way to turn those future
views into new sponsor revenue. The
brand keeps collecting exposure long
after the check clears while you're
locked out of earning more from that
video. This created a lose-lose lose
situation. Creators left massive money
on the table. Brands had no way to
measure if their sponsorships actually
worked and audiences got stuck with
outdated ads for products that might not
even exist anymore. But YouTube was
watching this broken system for years
and they just released an update that
fixes everything. Here's how
YouTube looked at this broken system and
said, "What if creators could operate
exactly like TV networks?" Dynamic ad
insertion lets creators place swappable
ad slots into their videos. Instead of
burning sponsors permanently into
content, creators can now insert,
remove, and replace sponsored segments
whenever they want. This is exactly how
TV networks have operated for 70 plus
years, selling the same time slot to
different advertisers throughout the
year. Creators just got the same
capability. Think about it like this.
Remember that productivity video that
got 2 million views? With dynamic ad
insertion, the creator can now sell that
ad slot to that productivity app for 3
months. When the deal ends, replace it
with a different sponsor. They can also
test different brands to see which
converts better. They can even sell the
same slot to different companies in
different countries. Creators just
became TV networks selling real
guaranteed ad slots in their back
cataloges, not just oneshot sponsorships
baked into the video forever. For
brands, this is a revolution. Instead of
rolling the dice on a lump sum deal and
hoping a video delivers, you pay based
on the exact performance. Want $100,000
guaranteed impressions? Pay the set CPM.
say $2,500 at a $25 CPM. If the video
only hits 50,000 impressions, you only
pay half. You never are overpaying for
missed reach. What if the video goes
viral and hits a million views? Once
your campaign reaches its cap, the next
sponsor rotates in and the creator keeps
earning. If the creator's audience is
highly engaged, niche, or especially
valuable, expect a premium CPM because
just like TV, in- demand slots cost
more, just like Super Bowl ad slots.
Now, both brands and creators win.
Brands pay for real, measurable results,
and creators maximize their earnings,
charging premiums for top content and
hard-to-reach audiences with every new
sponsor slot, transparently tracked by
YouTube. It's TV level ad buying,
programmatically controlled, and built
for the creator era. Finally,
advertising that makes sense for
everyone. Now, this may sound
complicated, but stick with me because
I'm about to show you exactly how
creators can use this to build media
empires.
[Music]
Here's where creators need to completely
shift their thinking. You're not just
making videos anymore. You're building a
media network. Let me paint a picture of
what this looks like. Imagine you're a
tech reviewer with 200 videos in your
back catalog. Under the old system,
maybe 10 of those videos had sponsor
deals that paid you once. The other 190
videos, they're just sitting there
making little to no money. With dynamic
ad insertion, every single one of those
200 videos becomes advertising
inventory. Your iPhone review from 2022,
that still gets 10,000 views per month.
That's 120,000 annual impressions that
you can sell. Your laptop comparison
from 2021, another 80,000 yearly
impressions. Suddenly, you're not just
running a YouTube channel, you're
running a tech media network with
quantifiable, sellable inventory. That
means you can start thinking about your
content the way TV networks think about
programming. TV networks create shows
with natural advertising breaks. They
don't just randomly stick in ads
anywhere. They create natural moments
where sponsors can integrate seamlessly.
As a creator, you can now do the same
thing when you're planning your next
video. Think to yourself, where are
natural moments for brand integration?
How can I structure this content so
sponsors can fit in authentically? Maybe
it's a before we dive into technical
details moment. Or maybe it's speaking
of productivity transition. You're not
just creating content, you're creating
advertising real estate. But this only
works for brands that understand how to
use this new superpower. And that's what
most companies are completely missing.
Most brands are still thinking about
creator partnerships completely wrong.
They're approaching creators like
freelancers instead of what they
actually are, individual TV networks
with measurable audiences. Here's how
smart brands are going to dominate with
dynamic ad insertion. First, the
portfolio approach. Instead of putting
all your budget behind one creator and
hoping their videos go viral, you can
now spread your budget across 20 plus
creators and optimize based on
performance. Just like buying
programmatic ads across multiple sites.
Second, testing paradise. Want to test
which message resonates better? Create
two different 30-cond ads and test them
in the same creators video slots. Want
to test geographic differences? Run
different ads for the US versus a UK
audience in the same content. Third,
audience segmentation. That tech creator
we talked about, their audience probably
breaks down into different segments.
Gamers, professionals, students. You can
now create different ads for each
segment and serve them dynamically based
on viewing patterns. Fourth, long-term
partnerships. Instead of one-off deals,
you can now build ongoing relationships
with creators. Hey, I want to buy
500,000 impressions across your catalog
over the next 6 months. Optimize for
conversions and let's see what happens.
This is exactly how TV advertising
works. NBC doesn't just sell one
commercial saw and hope for the best.
They sell you ongoing access to the
audience with measurement, optimization,
and guaranteed delivery. Creators just
got the same capabilities. So, let me
give you an example for how I would do
this in my YouTube video. If you're a
brand watching this and thinking, "I
need to get ahead of this shift, but I
have no idea where to start." We're
already helping those companies do
exactly that at my ad agency, NP
Digital. We're building creator
partnership strategies for major brands
right now. The same approach that I just
explained. Go to npdigital.com,
book a call, and we'll show you how to
lock in the best creator partnerships
before your competitors even know this
exists. See what I did there? Now, back
to the video.
Let me give you some numbers that'll
blow your mind. Traditional TV
advertising generates around $60 billion
a year, but it's shrinking by mids
single digits annually, down roughly 27%
over the past decade. YouTube
advertising does around 36 billion
annually and growing at 13% this year.
Traditional TV viewership has aging
audiences, declining engagement, and
it's impossible to measure accurately,
while YouTube viewership has younger
demographics, higher engagement, and
precise measurement. For decades, big
brands have been stuck buying TV ads
because that's where the audiences were.
But TV had massive problems. You never
knew if your ads actually work. You
couldn't target specific demographics
effectively. You paid the same price
whether 1 million or 10 million people
saw your ad. and dynamic ad insertion
just solved all these problems while
giving your brands access to younger,
more engaged audiences. You're about to
witness the biggest wealth transfer in
media history. From TV networks to
individual creators, the top 100 US
advertisers spend well over hundred
billion each year to reach consumers.
Companies like Nike, Coca-Cola, Apple,
and Amazon. With TV viewership declining
fast, these brands are shifting more of
their budgets to platforms like YouTube
where audiences are younger, more
engaged, and easier to measure.
YouTube's new tools make it easier than
ever before for these brands to target
exactly who they want, unlocking a new
era of video advertising. And here's the
beautiful part. This creates more value
for everyone. Audiences get more
relevant ads instead of random
commercials. Creators get sustainable
revenue instead of feast or famine
cycles, and brands get measurable
results instead of expensive guesses.
But there's a window here that's already
starting to close.
Testing for dynamic ad insertion starts
in late 2025. Full roll out happens in
2026. That means you need to get started
now. If you're a creator, start thinking
like a media company right now. Audit
your content library and identify your
evergreen videos, the ones that still
get consistent views. These are the most
valuable advertising slots. Begin
structuring your new content with
natural sponsor integration points.
Study how TV shows create seamless
advertising moments and incorporate
those techniques into your videos. Most
importantly, start conversations with
your existing brand partners about
dynamic deals. Instead of one-off
sponsorships, propose ongoing
partnerships where they get reoccurring
access to your audience. for brands.
Stop thinking projectbased and start
thinking media buy. Identify creators in
your space who have strong back
cataloges and engage audiences. These
are your future media partners. Begin
testing small dynamic partnerships even
if full feature isn't available. You can
start structuring deals that mirror
what's coming. The media landscape just
fundamentally changed and most people
don't even realize that it's happening.
Dynamic ad insertion isn't just a
YouTube feature. It's a blueprint for
how advertising will work across every
digital platform. If you want to see how
this connects to the broader
transformation happening in digital
marketing from AI search optimization to
emerging advertising channels, check out
one of these videos X.